Add KZG multi verify function (#3236)
ethereum/consensus-specs: specs/deneb/polynomial-commitments.md

| - | - |
| `FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB` | `uint64(4096)` |
| `FIAT_SHAMIR_PROTOCOL_DOMAIN` | `b'FSBLOBVERIFY_V1_'` |

> | `RANDOM_CHALLENGE_KZG_MULTI_DOMAIN` | `b'RCKZGMULTI___V1_'` |

Reviewer: Making this look like the one above

```suggestion
| `RANDOM_CHALLENGE_KZG_MULTI_DOMAIN` | `b'RCKZGMULTI_V1_'` |
```

Reviewer 2: I think it's that way so the value is 16 bytes.

Author: Yeah :)

Reviewer: ACK. Let's leave it as is then.

    return polynomial
```

#### `compute_challenge`

```python
def compute_challenge(blob: Blob,
                      commitment: KZGCommitment) -> BLSFieldElement:
    """
    Return the Fiat-Shamir challenge required by the rest of the protocol.
    The Fiat-Shamir logic works as per the following pseudocode:
    """

    # Append the number of polynomials and the degree of each polynomial as a domain separator
    num_polynomials = int.to_bytes(1, 8, ENDIANNESS)
    degree_poly = int.to_bytes(FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB, 8, ENDIANNESS)
    data = FIAT_SHAMIR_PROTOCOL_DOMAIN + degree_poly + num_polynomials

>     # Append each polynomial which is composed by field elements

Reviewer 2: The comments in this function are a bit out-of-date. They talk of multiple polynomials, g1 points, and challenges.

Author: Yes, that's fair. I also simplified the logic a bit by removing the number of polynomials from the domain separator.

    return polynomial
```

#### `compute_challenge`

```python
def compute_challenge(blob: Blob,
                      commitment: KZGCommitment) -> BLSFieldElement:
    """

>     Return the Fiat-Shamir challenges required by the rest of the protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Return the evaluation point challenge using Fiat-Shamir.
```

Author: Well I don't think that wording is correct. Fiat-Shamir is a transformation (turning interactive protocols into non-interactive ones) not a way to compute challenges.

Reviewer: Good point. I see it was changed to "challenge" which is accurate so we can disregard this.

    ])
```

#### `verify_kzg_proof_multi`

```python
def verify_kzg_proof_multi(commitments: Sequence[KZGCommitment],
                           zs: Sequence[BLSFieldElement],
                           ys: Sequence[BLSFieldElement],

>                            proofs: Sequence[KZGProof]) -> bool:

Reviewer 2: I believe these parameter types should be `Bytes48` and `Bytes32` for consistency. Especially since `bls.bytes48_to_G1(commitment)` is used below. You'd want to rename the parameter names too, to append "_bytes" to each one.

Reviewer 2: What's everyone's opinion on removing the "_bytes" from parameter names?

Author: I don't think so? It's the same as `verify_kzg_proof_impl` and only used internally, so it seems right to me. But @asn-d6 can comment maybe?

Reviewer 2: Oh it's only used internally, disregard then.

    """
    Verify multiple KZG proofs efficiently.
    """

    assert len(commitments) == len(zs) == len(ys) == len(proofs)

    # Compute a random challenge. Note that it does not have to be computed from a hash,
    # r just has to be random.
    degree_poly = int.to_bytes(FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB, 8, ENDIANNESS)
    num_commitments = int.to_bytes(len(commitments), 8, ENDIANNESS)
    data = RANDOM_CHALLENGE_KZG_MULTI_DOMAIN + degree_poly + num_commitments

>     # Append each polynomial which is composed by field elements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Append all inputs to the transcript before we hash
```

    for commitment, z, y, proof in zip(commitments, zs, ys, proofs):
        data += commitment \
            + int.to_bytes(z, BYTES_PER_FIELD_ELEMENT, ENDIANNESS) \
            + int.to_bytes(y, BYTES_PER_FIELD_ELEMENT, ENDIANNESS) \
            + proof

>     hashed_data = hash(data)

Reviewer: Now that we are not squeezing out multiple challenges from the same input, can we do a single hash instead of double (we currently do one in `hash()` and another in `hash_to_bls_field()`). Same question applies to `compute_challenge()`. 

'm trying to simplify as much as possible this code segment since it actually takes some effort in C: https://github.com/ethereum/c-kzg-4844/blob/7cb53389509f8c4616d7875fec22734896b83646/src/c_kzg_4844.c#L727

Author: Yes, I agree that makes sense.

    r = hash_to_bls_field(hashed_data + b'\x00')
    r_powers = compute_powers(r, len(commitments))

    # Verify: e(sum r^i proof_i, [s]) ==
    # e(sum r^i (commitment_i - [y_i]) + sum r^i z_i proof_i, [1])
    proof_lincomb = g1_lincomb(proofs, r_powers)
    proof_z_lincomb = g1_lincomb(proofs, [z * r_power for z, r_power in zip(zs, r_powers)])

>     C_minus_ys = [bls.G1_to_bytes48(bls.add(bls.bytes48_to_G1(commitment), bls.multiply(bls.G1, BLS_MODULUS - y)))
>                   for commitment, y in zip(commitments, ys)]
>     C_minus_y_as_KZGCommitments = [KZGCommitment(x) for x in C_minus_ys]

Reviewer: An attempt at moving mental congestion around (no strong opinion about this one):

```suggestion
    C_minus_ys = [bls.add(bls.bytes48_to_G1(commitment), bls.multiply(bls.G1, BLS_MODULUS - y))
                  for commitment, y in zip(commitments, ys)]
    C_minus_y_as_KZGCommitments = [KZGCommitment(bls.G1_to_bytes48(x)) for x in C_minus_ys]
```

    return KZGProof(g1_lincomb(bit_reversal_permutation(KZG_SETUP_LAGRANGE), quotient_polynomial))
```

#### `compute_blob_kzg_proof`

```python
def compute_blob_kzg_proof(blob: Blob) -> KZGProof:
    """
    Given a blob, return the KZG proof that is used to verify it against the commitment.
    Public method.
    """
    commitment = blob_to_kzg_commitment(blob)
    polynomial = blob_to_polynomial(blob)
    evaluation_challenge = compute_challenge(blob, commitment)
    return compute_kzg_proof_impl(polynomial, evaluation_challenge)
```

#### `verify_blob_kzg_proof`

```python
def verify_blob_kzg_proof(blob: Blob,
                          commitment_bytes: Bytes48,
                          proof_bytes: Bytes48) -> bool:
    """
    Given a blob and a KZG proof, verify that the blob data corresponds to the provided commitment.

    Public method.
    """
    commitment = bytes_to_kzg_commitment(commitment_bytes)

    polynomial = blob_to_polynomial(blob)
    evaluation_challenge = compute_challenge(blob, commitment)

>     # Evaluate polynomial at `evaluation_challenge` (evaluation function checks for div-by-zero)

Reviewer: We no longer check for div-by-zero so we can remove that

```suggestion
    # Evaluate polynomial at `evaluation_challenge`
```

    y = evaluate_polynomial_in_evaluation_form(polynomial, evaluation_challenge)

    # Verify proof
    proof = bytes_to_kzg_proof(proof_bytes)
    return verify_kzg_proof_impl(commitment, evaluation_challenge, y, proof)
```

#### `verify_blob_kzg_proof_multi`

```python
def verify_blob_kzg_proof_multi(blobs: Sequence[Blob],
                                commitments_bytes: Sequence[Bytes48],
                                proofs_bytes: Sequence[Bytes48]) -> bool:
    """
    Given a list of blobs and blob KZG proofs, verify that they correspond to the provided commitments.

    Public method.
    """
    

>     commitments, evaluation_challenges, ys, proofs = [], [], [], []

Reviewer 2: I think there should be a check that ensures the sequences are the same length, like `verify_kzg_proof_multi` does:

```python
assert len(blobs) == len(commitments_bytes) == len(proofs_bytes)
```

Same thing could be done for `verify_aggregate_kzg_proof_multi` too.

Author: Yeah done.

    for blob, commitment_bytes, proof_bytes in zip(blobs, commitments_bytes, proofs_bytes):
        commitment = bytes_to_kzg_commitment(commitment_bytes)
        commitments.append(commitment)
        polynomial = blob_to_polynomial(blob)
        evaluation_challenge = compute_challenge(blob, commitment)
        evaluation_challenges.append(evaluation_challenge)
        ys.append(evaluate_polynomial_in_evaluation_form(polynomial, evaluation_challenge))
        proofs.append(bytes_to_kzg_proof(proof_bytes))

    return verify_kzg_proof_multi(commitments, evaluation_challenges, ys, proofs)
```

#### `verify_aggregate_kzg_proof_multi`

```python

> def verify_aggregate_kzg_proof_multi(list_blobs: Sequence[Sequence[Blob]],

Reviewer: Is this function needed any longer now that we don't do aggregated proofs?

Also it seems weird. It computes `evaluation_challenge` twice.

Author: It's removed

                                     list_commitments_bytes: Sequence[Sequence[Bytes48]],
                                     list_aggregated_proof_bytes: Sequence[Bytes48]) -> bool:
    """

>     Given a list of blobs and an aggregated KZG proof, verify that they correspond to the provided commitments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Given a list of blobs, their commitments and their proofs, verify them in an amortized fashion.
```
